# Manage a simple VLAN service

The **vlan.yml** playbook in this repository manages (add/modify/remove) a simple VLAN service described in the *services.yml* data model on NX-OS switches.

## Explore the progress

I created a number of git branches while developing this example to allow you to explore various stages of the project. Use <code>git checkout *branch*</code> to check out the desired stage of the project into your working directory.

The branches you can explore are:

* ***VLAN_Initial*** - initial implementation that provisions VLAN database, interfaces and access VLANs straight from the services data model
* ***VLAN_Data_Model*** - transforms services data model into per-node data model at the beginning of the playbook for easier processing. The introduction of per-node data model simplified the provisioning process.
* ***VLAN_Decommission*** - add support for service decommissioning and customer site description in the services data model, which triggered changes in data model transformation and minor adjustments in service provisioning process.
* ***VLAN_Validation*** - validates successful deployment of VLAN services: VLANs are created and configured as access VLANs on service ports.
* ***VLAN_Cleanup*** - cleanup of VLANs and service ports no longer used by active services.
* ***VLAN_PreDeploy_Check*** - check the actual hardware before service deployment
* ***Logging*** - extensive logging and debugging support
* ***Plugins*** - Jinja2 filter plugins are used for unique key and composite key tests
* ***Transactions*** - integration with an external transaction system
* ***MultiVendor*** - add multi-platform/vendor support

## Data model

Service definition file (services.yml) is a YAML dictionary with every customer being a key/value pair. Each customer record has a **vlan** key (VLAN# used for this customer) and a list of active service ports (**ports** key). Later stages of the project add **state** key to indicate a service should be removed (when **state** is set to **absent**).

The list of service ports is a list of dictionaries, each one of them having:
* **node**: device on which the service port is configured
* **port**: port on the device
* **site**: site name within customer network (used for interface descriptions)

Here's a sample service definition file:

    ---
    ACME:
      vlan: 100
      ports:
      - { node: leaf-1, port: "Ethernet2/1", site: "ACME Downtown" }
      - { node: leaf-2, port: "GigabitEthernet0/1", site: "ACME Remote" }

    Wonka:
      vlan: 200
      state: absent
      ports:
      - { node: leaf-1, port: "Ethernet2/3"}
      - { node: leaf-2, port: "GigabitEthernet0/3" }

## Tests

All the tests included in this project are in *tests* directory:

* ***model.yml*** - creates per-node data models and stores them in *printouts* directory
* ***cleanup-test.yml*** - test harness for the cleanup module
* ***predeploy.yml*** - test harness for pre-deploy checks
* ***list-plugin.yml*** - unit tests for `append` plugin in ***list.py***
* ***unique-plugin.yml*** - unit tests for `dupattr` plugin in ***list.py***

The same directory contains bash scripts that execute a suite of unit tests:

* ***run-predeploy-tests*** executes ***predeploy.yml*** playbook for every `*pdf*` test in the ***services*** subdirectory

The tests use multiple scenarios stored in various subdirectory of the tests directory:

* ***input*** - data generated by various ***show*** commands (used for cleanup tests). Scenarios are generated by executing **show** commands on NX-OS with the **create-getinfo-scenario.sh** scripts.
* ***services*** - unit test scenarios for pre-deploy checks; include numerous valid service scenarios as well as scenarios that are supposed to fail (`*pdf*`) or succeed (`*pdok*`).

Further bash scripts create additional testing files:

* ***create-model-scenario.sh*** creates a set of JSON per-node data models from a services data model.